---
layout: post
title: "Copy semantics, per Plato's _Sophist_"
date: 2022-12-15 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  c++-learner-track
  old-shit
  value-semantics
---

In Plato's _Sophist_ (translated by Nicholas P. White) we find this
exchange between Theaetetus and the visiting philosopher. The visitor
asks Theaetetus a question I've been asked many times: What do we mean
by _copy_?

> VISITOR: [...] Whenever we call him a copy-maker, he'll ask us
> what in the world we mean by a "copy." We need to think, Theaetetus,
> about how to answer the young man’s question.
>
> THEAETETUS: Obviously we'll say we mean copies in water and mirrors,
> and also copies that are drawn and stamped and everything else like
> that.
>
> VISITOR: [...] He'll ask about what runs through all those things which you call many,
> but which you thought you should call by the one name, "copy,"
> to cover them all, as if they were all one thing.
> Say something, then, and defend yourself, and don't give any ground to him.
>
> THEAETETUS: What in the world would we say a copy is, sir,
> except something that's made similar to a true thing,
> and is another thing that's like it?

(At this point, the dialogue goes a little off the C++ rails;
the visitor seems to want to refer by the word _copy_ to what a C++ programmer
would call a _reference_: "not really what is, but what we call a likeness."
In C++ terms, a copy is an imitation that is _indeed_ a second true thing,
just as good as the original; and so Theaetetus could have saved himself a
lot of time.)

----

The example I always use to explain C++'s copy semantics is:

    int a = 1;
    int b = a;       // b is a copy of a
    b += 1;
    assert(b == 2);
    assert(a == 1);  // the original is unchanged

    std::string a = "hello";
    std::string b = a;     // b is a copy of a
    b += "!";
    assert(b == "hello!");
    assert(a == "hello");  // the original is unchanged

Copying an object always makes a _copy_:

- something with the same _value_ as the original ("Copies are equal"),
- but which is a second _object_, that you can mutate independently of the first ("Copies are disjoint").

Copying an `int` copies its (integer) value. Copying a `string`
copies its (textual) value. Copying an `int*` copies its (pointer)
value.

    int array[10];
    int *a = &array[1];
    int *b = a;   // b is a copy of a
    b += 1;
    assert(b == &array[2]);
    assert(a == &array[1]);  // the original is unchanged

Copying a `shared_ptr<Widget>` also copies its (pointer) value:
the copy compares equal to the original; that is, they both hold the
same pointer value (they both "point to the same place").

Copying a `string_view` copies its (string-view) value. This is
a little tricky: copying a _string-view_ value doesn't mean the same
thing as copying a _string_ value! But remember Theaetetus: copying a
_sculpture_ doesn't mean the same thing as copying a
_photograph of that sculpture_. One of those copies gives you a
second sculpture; the other gives you a second photograph of the
same sculpture. It all depends on _what we're copying_. Copy a sculpture,
get a sculpture. Copy a photograph, get a photograph. Copy a `string`,
get a `string`. Copy a `string_view`, get a `string_view`.

    std::string sculpture = "hello";
    std::string_view a = std::string_view(sculpture);
    std::string_view b = a;   // b is a copy of a
    b.remove_prefix(3);
    assert(b == "lo");
    assert(a == "hello");  // the original is unchanged

Each time you author a C++ type, you get to decide what kind of "value" is
represented by that type: what it means for two such "values" to compare
"equal," what it means for them to be "disjoint," and thus what it must
mean to "copy" such a value.
