---
layout: post
title: "P1144 PMR koans"
date: 2023-06-03 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  allocators
  implementation-divergence
  relocatability
  value-semantics
  wg21
---

This is the fourth in a series of blog posts
([I](/blog/2023/02/24/trivial-swap-x-prize/),
[II](/blog/2023/03/03/relocate-algorithm-design/),
[III](/blog/2023/03/10/sharp-knife-dull-knife/),
[IV](/blog/2023/06/03/p1144-pmr-koans/))
that I started after the Issaquah WG21 meeting, in order to
(1) resolve the technical differences between
[P1144 "`std::is_trivially_relocatable`"](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p1144r8.html)
and the now-multiple Bloomberg papers on the topic
([P2786R1](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2786r1.pdf),
[P2839R0](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2839r0.html),
and the comparative analysis [P2814R0](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2814r0.pdf)),
and (2) convince the rest of the C++ Committee
that these resolutions are actually okay to ship.

This post's topic is the reason (as I understand it) that Bloomberg is
suddenly re-interested in trivial relocatability: <b>the polymorphic allocator model.</b>

If the C++ allocator model and/or PMR are unfamiliar to you, you should
check out yesterday's ["A not-so-quick introduction to the C++ allocator model"](/blog/2023/06/02/not-so-quick-pmr/) (2023-06-02).

If the unfamiliar part is trivial relocation, check out the wealth of information in my
["Trivially Relocatable"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGdfPextuAU) talk from C++Now 2019,
and/or the [#relocatability tag](/blog/tags/#relocatability) on this blog.


## Things we'd like to have

Let's start with some "friendly" examples. We want the implementation
to optimize each of these examples in the "obvious" way. This section
contains no tricks or gotchas. Those will come in the next section.

We'll use the following types in the examples:

    struct TC { int i; };
    struct TR { std::shared_ptr<int> p; };

    static_assert(std::is_trivially_copyable_v<TC>);
    static_assert(std::is_trivially_relocatable_v<TR>);

### 1. Trivial relocatability should propagate in the natural way

We already relied on this premise when we said that `TR` was trivially relocatable.
Rule-of-Zero types, all of whose members are trivially relocatable, must be
considered trivially relocatable themselves.

### 2. Vector reallocation should use memcpy

    std::vector<TC> v(100);
    v.reserve(v.capacity() + 1);

Today, this will use `TC`'s move-constructor and destructor in a loop;
but we'd like it to use a single 400-byte `memcpy` instead. Right?
(P1144 and P2786 agree on this.)

There are several subcategories here, each with their own ramifications:

### 2b. Vector reallocation _of PMR types_ should use memcpy

    std::vector<std::pmr::vector<int>> v(100);
    v.reserve(v.capacity() + 1);

### 2c. Reallocation _in `pmr::vector`_ should use memcpy

    std::pmr::vector<TC> v(100);
    v.reserve(v.capacity() + 1);

### 2d. Reallocation _of PMR types in `pmr::vector`_ should use memcpy

    std::pmr::vector<std::pmr::vector<int>> v(100);
    v.reserve(v.capacity() + 1);

P2786 §4.3 and §6.4 strongly imply that P2786 would like to support this use-case
in particular. Also notice that (2b) and (2d) imply `is_trivially_relocatable_v<pmr::vector<int>>`;
this will become important later. I don't think there's any way to achieve (2b)
or (2d) without violating (3)...

### 3. PMR shouldn't be a special case

    namespace My {
      template<class T>
      struct polymorphic_allocator { ~~~~ };

      template<class T>
      using vector = std::vector<T, My::polymorphic_allocator<T>>;
    };

    My::vector<My::vector<int>> v(100);
    ~~~~

PMR types have many non-trivial layers of indirection (e.g.
`polymorphic_allocator::construct` and the
[soon-to-be-undeprecated](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2875r0.pdf)
`polymorphic_allocator::destroy`. We'll be tempted to say
"The implementation doesn't actually need to look through all these layers;
it can just look for exactly `pmr::foo` and special-case it somehow."
Here are three counterarguments:

* C++ should always permit reinventing the wheel. `My::polymorphic_allocator`
    should be able to work exactly as well as `pmr::polymorphic_allocator`.
    If Joe Coder can't implement PMR without dabbling in secret
    vendor-specific magic, that's bad.

* Vendors themselves think special cases are yucky.
    If you manage your own implementation (<i>cough</i> Bloomberg),
    feel free to add all the special cases you want; but if WG21 standardizes
    a proposal that permits "bad performance, or good performance after a bunch
    of ad-hoc special-case code," well, that's just a verbose way of saying
    "bad performance."
    (Vendors already don't like PMR. You want them to cruft up their code
    with special cases just to rescue PMR's performance? That's not going to happen.)
    In other words, if _the vendor_ can't implement PMR without dabbling in
    vendor-specific magic, that's bad.

* Most importantly, if you really believe the vendor should just special-case PMR,
    then you don't need P1144 or P2786 at all! Look at libstdc++, for example; it's
    recognized `deque` as a special case for vector reallocation
    [since late 2018](https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=87106).
    Vendors don't need the Standard's permission to add special cases,
    _when they want to_ (which is rare).
    A proposal must handle arbitrary user-defined types like
    `My::vector` and `My::allocator`, or it has no point at all.

### 4. Vector insert and erase should use memmove

    std::vector<TC> v(100);
    v.erase(v.begin());

Today, this will call `TC`'s move-assignment operator 99 times
and then destroy the rightmost `TC`. But we'd like it to destroy the
leftmost `TC` and then memmove `99*sizeof(TC)` bytes leftward.

Surely we'd like this to happen if possible, right? Otherwise
this is performance we're leaving on the table.

P2786 doesn't mention this case, but Bloomberg's `bsl::vector` does
this exact optimization; it would be silly to forbid `std::vector` from
doing it.

Again there are subcategories here, each with their own ramifications.
The analogous cases to (2b) and (2c) are actually a little tricky:

    std::vector<std::pmr::vector<int>> v(100);
    v.erase(v.begin());

    std::pmr::vector<TC> v(100);
    v.erase(v.begin());

### 4d. Insert and erase _of PMR types in `pmr::vector`_ should use memmove

    std::pmr::vector<std::pmr::vector<int>> v(100);
    v.erase(v.begin());

Today, this will call `pmr::vector<int>`'s move-assignment operator 99 times
and then destroy the rightmost `pmr::vector`. But since all of the elements in `v` have
the same allocator, this is equivalent to destroying the leftmost `pmr::vector`
and then memmoving `99*sizeof(v[0])` bytes leftward.

We'd really like to make this work, if we can.

### 5. `swap_ranges` of trivially copyable types should use memswap

    TC a[100];
    TC b[100];
    std::swap_ranges(a, a+100, b);

Today, this will call `std::swap(a[i], b[i])` in a loop;
but we'd like it to swap `a`'s bytes with `b`'s, in whatever size chunks
are most performant. Right?

### 5b. `rotate` of trivially copyable types should use memswap

    TC a[100];
    std::rotate(a, a+50, a+100);

In practice this is equivalent to `std::swap_ranges(a, a+50, a+50)`,
and will automatically benefit from whatever performance enhancements
we give `swap_ranges`.


## Problematic koans

### The memory-stomping deallocator

[Godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/G3rqqnWs8):

    template<class T>
    struct A : std::allocator<T> {
      template<class U>
      void destroy(U *p) {
        std::destroy_at(p);
        memset(p, 0xDE, sizeof(U));
      }
    };

    int main() {
      std::vector<int, A<int>> v = {1,2,3,4,5};
      v.erase(v.begin());
      assert(v.data()[4] == 0xDEDEDEDE); // UB
    }

Allocator `A`'s intent is to mitigate the damage of dangling pointer dereferences
by overwriting every destroyed object with `0xDEDEDEDE`. But if `v.erase` ends
the lifetime of `v[4]` by relocating out of it (instead of calling `A::destroy`
on it), then `v[4]` won't get overwritten. This defeats `A`'s intention.

The effect in this case is theoretically unobservable: the line reading
`v.data()[4]` has UB. (`vector` would be within its rights to go back after
the destruction of `v[4]` and write into that memory an arbitrary value; say, "5".)

The natural solution in this case is to say that `vector::erase` isn't allowed
to use relocation if `A::destroy` is non-trivial. The core language refuses to
make a type "naturally" trivially relocatable unless its value-semantic operations
are defaulted; `vector` likewise should refuse to _trivially relocate_ a type
unless the allocator's `construct` and `destroy` are defaulted.

> Allocators already nerf the vector pessimization:
> a nothrow-move-constructible type can still throw from `A::construct`.
> This is [LWG 2461](https://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/issue2461).


### The PMR aggregate

[Godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/nv1hchdfj):

    struct Agg {
      std::pmr::vector<int> pv_;
    };

    int main() {
      std::vector<Agg> v;
      v.push_back({ std::pmr::vector<int>({1,2}, &mr1) });
      v.push_back({ std::pmr::vector<int>({3,4}, &mr2) });
      v.erase(v.begin());
      assert(v[0].pv_.get_allocator().resource() == &mr1);
    }

If you accept (3) plus any of (2b,2d,4d), then you ought to accept
`is_trivially_relocatable_v<pmr::vector<int>>`. Then (1) implies
that `Agg` is also trivially relocatable; then (4) implies that this `v.erase`
should use memmove. But then we have a problem!

There are several natural solutions in this case:

- Reject (2b,2d,4d) or (3): `pmr::vector<int>` simply can't be trivially relocatable.
    This means it gets none of the optimizations we're talking about,
    unless you reject (3) and write special-case optimizations for it.

- Reject (4,4d): `insert` and `erase` simply can't use memmove.

- Make the <b>"strong claim"</b> (as I historically have) that `v` violates `vector`'s preconditions.
    We've put into `v` a type which satisfies [`std::relocatable`](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p1144r8.html#wording-concept.relocatable)
    but the values we inserted, in this context, fail to model `std::relocatable`.
    This is UB, just like if we tried to `std::sort` an array of `float` where some
    of the values were NaN. The entire STL has an invisible precondition that types that _look_
    value-semantic (statically at compile time) must also _act_ value-semantic (dynamically
    at runtime), and if they don't, that's simply "library UB" — all bets are off.

- Make the weaker claim that `Agg` does model `std::relocatable`,
    but only by treating `pv_.get_allocator()` as [non-salient](/blog/2023/06/02/not-so-quick-pmr/#allocator-is-not-salient-state).
    Then our mistake wasn't in the `erase`, but only that the `assert` expects something
    it has no right to expect. We may reasonably expect a certain _value_ in `v[0]`,
    but we mustn't expect anything in particular of its non-salient attributes.
    It would be equally groundless of us to base the correctness of our C++ program
    on the assumption that, say, `v[0].pv_.capacity() == 2`.


### The evil allocator-aware type

This is why [(4c)](#again-there-are-subcategories-he) was tricky. [Godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/zfx5oWP4W):

    struct Widget {
      using allocator_type = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<Widget>;
      Widget(int i) : i_(i) {}
      explicit Widget(int i, allocator_type) : i_(i) {}
      explicit Widget(const Widget& rhs, allocator_type) : i_(rhs.i_ + 100) {}
      int i_;
    };
    static_assert(std::is_trivially_copyable_v<Widget>);

    int main() {
      std::pmr::vector<Widget> v = {1,2,3};
      assert(v[0].i_ == 101);
      v.reserve(v.capacity() + 1);
      assert(v[0].i_ == 201);
    }

If you accept (2d), then you should accept that `v`'s reallocation should be able
to use memcpy. After all, the element type `Widget` is trivially copyable, just like `int`!
But `Widget`'s constructor overload set has been carefully crafted to count the number
of times it's called via `polymorphic_allocator::construct`.

This snippet is by far the most pathological, but it's also the most clearly well-defined.
We're not inspecting deallocated memory, nor non-salient state. `Widget` clearly
models all the semantic requirements of `std::relocatable` — heck, it's trivially copyable!
So there are relatively few ways we can deal with this.

- Reject (2c,2d): As in ["The memory-stomping deallocator,"](#the-memory-stomping-deallocator)
    say `vector<T,A>` isn't allowed to reallocate in terms of relocation when `A::construct` or
    `A::destroy` is non-trivial. This implies that `pmr::vector<int>` can't use memcpy to
    reallocate its buffer.

- Reject (3), e.g. by using our intimate knowledge of `polymorphic_allocator::construct` to
    let `pmr::vector<T>` use memcpy as long as `!uses_allocator<T, allocator_type>`.
    Even then, (2d) remains out of reach.

> Playing around with this example, you'll find that libstdc++ has trouble with the
> very first `assert`: it thinks it can skip `construct` simply because `Widget` is trivially
> copyable. That's now [bug #110102](https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=110102).)


### The rotate

[Godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/esjW1x3zG):

    std::pmr::vector<int> vv[] = {
      std::pmr::vector<int>({1,2,3}, &mr1),
      std::pmr::vector<int>({4,5,6}, &mr2),
    };
    std::rotate(vv, vv+1, vv+2);
      // In practice, equivalent to swap(vv[0], vv[1])

If you accept (3) plus any of (2b,2d,4d), then you accept `is_trivially_relocatable_v<pmr::vector<int>>`.
If you then accept (5,5b), you'll expect this `rotate` to use memswap.
But that would swap the arenas of `vv[0]` and `vv[1]`!

Swapping the arenas would actually be preferable to what this code does today, i.e.,
[UB and heap corruption](/blog/2023/06/02/not-so-quick-pmr/#you-might-ask-what-happens-if-i).
But there is a third possible outcome, preferred by Bloomberg:
to copy `vv[0]`'s data into `mr2` and copy `vv[1]`'s data into `mr1`, just as if we
had done `vv[0] = std::exchange(vv[1], vv[0])` manually.

There are a few ways to deal with this:

- Reject `is_trivially_relocatable_v<pmr::vector<int>>`; but nobody wants
    to do that.

- Make [the strong claim](#make-the-strong-claim-as-i-histo) that the range `vv` violates the preconditions of `rotate`,
    as if you tried to `sort` a range of NaNs.

- Make [the weaker claim](#make-the-weaker-claim-that-agg-d) that the `rotate` is well-defined but `get_allocator()`
    isn't salient, so it's actually okay that `vv[0]` switched arenas as a result of
    the rotate.

- Claim that `rotate(vv, vv+1, vv+2)` should actually be well-defined, e.g. by
    adopting [P0178 "Allocators and swap"](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0178r0.html) (Meredith, February 2016).
    As a corollary, reject (5,5b): generic algorithms like `swap`, `swap_ranges`, `rotate`, `sort`, etc. simply
    aren't allowed to use trivial relocation, even on `TC`, because they must act as-if they're using
    ADL `swap` and they're no longer allowed to assume that ADL `swap` swaps only the _values_
    of its arguments. (See [LWG 2153](https://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/issue2153) for more details.)

I think this is the biggest disagreement between P1144 and Bloomberg: On the one hand I'm
completely unwilling to give up the performance benefits of (5,5b), and on the other hand
the Bloomberg authors seem unwilling yet to agree either that allocators are non-salient or
that it's okay for `rotate(vv, vv+1, vv+2)` to remain undefined.

Here are a couple of pie-in-the-sky ideas that might lead to answers of their own:

- Our last claim above complained that the library couldn't tell whether ADL `swap` was
    "defaulted." We could teach the core language about `swap` and allow it to be defaulted,
    the same way C++20 allows an ADL `operator==` to be defaulted. A defaulted operation
    can be [queried for triviality](https://godbolt.org/z/YxhYWfE78), exactly as I proposed in
    ["The Best Type Traits C++ Doesn't Have"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWBfmmg8-Yo&t=28m59s) (C++Now 2018).
    [N3746 "A C++1y Swap Operator"](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2013/n3746.pdf) (Brown, August 2013)
    was an early attempt to bring `swap` into the core language. We could try again, without the operator
    syntax (which I think N3746 proposed only because C++11 couldn't `=default` anything that
    wasn't a special member function).

- C++'s object model physically ensures that a contiguous range of polymorphic objects
    (e.g. `Cat[5]`, `vector<Cat>`) always have the same dynamic type. (If you can
    legally use pointer arithmetic to get from one to the next, they must have the same type.)
    Could we logically mandate somehow that a contiguous range of PMR-style objects
    must all be associated with the same arena? [P2685 "Language Support for Scoped Objects"](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2685r1.pdf)
    (Meredith & Berne, May 2023) is related, but I haven't read more than the introduction yet.
    (Obvious pitfall: Piecewise contiguous ranges, like `deque<pmr::string>`. Contiguity is
    not cut-and-dried; in the limit this leads to [the strong claim](#make-the-strong-claim-as-i-histo).)

----

This concludes the set of problematic koans... for now. If I stumble across any more problematic
snippets, I'll update this post.
