---
layout: post
title: "-Ought words"
date: 2023-02-20 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  etymology
  litclub
  old-shit
  today-i-learned
---

Have you ever noticed how so many English past tenses end with _-ought_ or _-aught_?

|----|----|
| bought | buy |
| brought | bring |
| caught | catch |
| distraught | distract |
| fought | fight |
| fraught | freight |
| might | may |
| sought | seek |
| taught | teach |
| thought | think |
| wrought | work, wreak |
{:.smaller}

(Consider also that something can be _stretched_ until it is _straight_, _tightened_ until it is _taut_.)

The other day I was reading [Thomas Edwards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Edwards_(critic))'
[_The Canons of Criticism_](https://books.google.com/books?id=rqhVAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA111) (1758) — a mildly
entertaining but much too long attack on William Warburton's editions of Pope and Shakespeare —
and came across a new entry for my table. _Hamlet_, Act III, Scene I:

> ROSENCRANTZ:  
> Madam, it so fell out, that certain players  
> We <b>o'er-raught</b> on the way: of these we told him;  
> And there did seem in him a kind of joy  
> To hear of it [...]

Edwards describes _over-raught_ as (not a corruption of _over-rode_ but) "the regular past tense of _over-reach_."
Compare Spenser's [_Faerie Queene_](https://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/content/faerie-queene-book-i-canto-7-1596):

> A monstrous beast ybred in filthy fen  
> He chose, which he had kept long time in darksome den [...]  
> His tayle was stretched out in wondrous length,  
> That to the house of heauenly gods it <b>raught</b>,  
> And with extorted pow'r and borrow'd strength,  
> The euer-burning lamps from thence it brought,  
> And prowdly threw to ground, as things of nought.

Wiktionary further tells me that _raught_ or _rought_ can also be the past tense of _reck_
(as in _reckon_, _reckless_). _Reck_ and _reach_ derive from different Proto-Indo-European roots,
but have converged to be more or less synonymous with _grasp_ ([_pace_ Robert Browning](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/43745/andrea-del-sarto)).

In writing this post, I learned that _hight_ (more or less synonymous with _yclept_) is the present perfect
of [_hote_](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/hote): "I am _hight_ Lancelot" only because people tend to _hote_ me Lancelot, you know.

And then there's this, from _Punchinello_ magazine [<b>2</b>:27](https://books.google.com/books?id=63otAQAAMAAJ&pg=RA1-PA11) (October 1870),
bylined "Amos Keeter" (get it?):

> Sally Salter, she was a young teacher, who <b>taught</b>,  
> And her friend, Charley Church, was a preacher, who <b>praught</b>;  
> Though his enemies called him a screecher, who <b>scraught</b>.
>
> His heart, when he saw her, kept sinking, and sunk,  
> And his eye, meeting hers, began winking, and wunk;  
> While she, in her turn, fell to thinking, and thunk.
>
> He hastened to woo her, and sweetly he wooed,  
> For his love grew until to a mountain it grewed,  
> And what he was longing to do, then he doed.
>
> In secret he wanted to speak, and he spoke,  
> To seek with his lips what his heart long had soke;  
> So he managed to let the truth leak, and it loke.
>
> He asked her to ride to the church, and they rode;  
> They so sweetly did glide, that they both thought they glode,  
> And they came to the place to be tied, and were tode.
>
> Then homeward he said let us drive, and they drove,  
> And soon as they wished to arrive, they arrove;  
> For whatever he couldn't contrive, she controve.
>
> The kiss he was dying to steal, then he stole,  
> At the feet where he wanted to kneel, there he knole,  
> And he said, "I feel better than ever I fole."
>
> So they to each other kept clinging, and clung,  
> While Time his swift circuit was winging, and wung;  
> And this was the thing he was bringing, and brung:
>
> The man Sally wanted to catch, and had <b>caught</b>—  
> That she wanted from others to snatch, and had <b>snaught</b>—  
> Was the one that she now liked to scratch; and she <b>scraught</b>.
>
> And Charley's warm love began freezing, and froze,  
> While he took to teasing, and cruëlly toze  
> The girl he had wished to be squeezing, and squoze.
>
> "Wretch!" he cried when she threatened to leave him, and left,  
> "How could you deceive me, as you have deceft?"  
> And she answered, "I promised to [cleave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auto-antonym) — and I've cleft!"
